multiverses
in our mathematical Universe Max tegmark
makes the Bold assertion that not only
do we live in a Multiverse but many
different kinds and that base reality is
mathematics
these are two metaphysical claims Max
describes four levels of the Multiverse
the first is distinguished by being the
universe of regular space we can observe
and the part of space beyond which we
can observe but nonetheless know to
exist because the universe is expanding
and so there are parts of space So Far
Away light from stars there has not had
time to reach us so max calls this
observable and unobservable distinction
a Multiverse other cosmologists just
call this regular space so it is a part
of regular cosmology normal science it
can be tested with actual observations
of physical things like the so-called
Hubble redshift of distant galaxies the
second level of Multiverse is postulated
as a solution to the fine tuning problem
the fine tuning problem asks why the
constants of nature things like the
charge on an electron strength of
gravity mass of the quarks and so on
have the values they do because were any
of them just slightly different the
universe we occupy would not be so
friendly for life it looks like a put-up
job as if someone has set things up
fiddled with the numbers another
purported solution to this is therefore
God did it which God and where they are
is another matter the level 2 Multiverse
just asserts all possible values for the
constants of nature exist in other
universes so fine-tuning is solved by
saying we should not be surprised we
occupy one of the very small number of
universes where conditions are just
right there is no way known of
experimentally testing this claim this
is why it does not now count as science
we cannot rule out a rival like God did
it we need a better explanation for fine
tuning non-science like this is not
pointless mathematics is non-science and
crucially important as is morality and
metaphysics it's no insult to be called
non-science unlike pseudoscience the
third level of Multiverse is the
everettian Quantum Multiverse this
Multiverse is likewise just regular
science when we perform an experiment
firing single particles like electrons
at a twin slit setup according to a
single Universe model we should have
replicability children learn this in
school the measure of a reliable
experiment is whether the results are
very close to being the same each time
you perform the experiment replicability
but when single electrons are fired at a
suitable twin slit Arrangement they do
not always take the same path poor
replicability according to a single
Universe model they should instead they
follow any of the paths deemed possible
by the equations of quantum theory which
say all possible power are taken each
time an electron is fired but we can
only ever observe one we occupy only one
universe and it is impossible to know
which Universe you'll be in ahead of
time which path your electron will take
only by doing the experiment do you find
out all of them exist but sometimes
you're in the universe that takes this
path then that path then some other path
we do the experiment and that's just
what we see repeat the experiment enough
and a subset of all possible paths are
taken revealing the interference pattern
it is the only known explanation of that
experiment and others like it that this
Multiverse exists some assert that
Consciousness is involved instead that
an observer collapses the wave function
they say to rule this out David Deutsch
devised an ingenious experimental test
whereby a future artificial general
intelligence would be able to have a
sense organ that did an interference
experiment it could set up a system with
two possible states which would then
interfere while being observed by the
AGI while the experiment was going on
the AGI would report it only ever
observes one of the two states not the
two of them but if the interference
happens we'd know there must have been
two of those AGI briefly each reporting
they observe only one state if the
interference does not happen we would
rule out the Multiverse explanation
because observation would have collapsed
the wave function hence the everettian
Multiverse is testable see David's
explanation of this in Paul Davies book
the ghost in the atom or for more on
testability C on the logic of
experimental tests particularly of
everetti and quantum theory that's a
paper by David Deutsche or my Multiverse
series and fictional story about all of
this in part four of my discussion of
chapter 11 of the beginning of infinity
top cast episode 27 or 28 depending upon
where you get it from the fourth and
final level of Multiverse under Max's
scheme is what he describes as all
mathematically conceivable structures so
if it is mathematically possible then it
exists on his account this is supposed
to be a final foundation for all
knowledge and there can be nothing
deeper this is likewise a metaphysical
and not a scientific claim as it cannot
be tested his book is subtitled my quest
for the ultimate nature of reality
why people are not satisfied with simply
knowing the nature of reality always
imperfectly and always open to
Improvement I don't know no they want
progress to stop they want the final
answer the ultimate final nature of
reality but besides why is what
mathematicians can conceive here with
their brains operating according to laws
of physics in our universe able to
constrain what is conceivable by alien
intelligence occupying universes with
different laws elsewhere it sounds a
little like the mathematician's
misconception doesn't it yes if one is
going to endure such a Multiverse to
really believe in it then one may as
well believe in David Lewis's all
logically possible worlds of course what
we think is logically possible and what
aliens who can prove different things in
their universes operating according to
different laws of physics think is
possible is another matter but we are in
the realm now of pure abstract
speculation metaphysics not science and
while it can be fun to speculate it's
more fun to know what you're doing and
where the dividing line is between good
explanations and easy to vary accounts
and between testable claims and
non-science the Multiverse is a
scientific theory but only if you are
precise about which version of it you
were talking about not all multiverses
are equal in epistemology